hope you all revised the heap data structure concepts in
this video
Let us learn how to implement the insert operation in
priority
Queue
Using heap data structures in the Heap data structure
we have used an array to implement the heap
Here we're going to use a vector to implement the
heap
Vectors are nothing but dynamic arrays which automatically resized themselves
when an element is inserted or deleted
So in simple arrays a static we can change
their size
at run time whereas a vector is a dynamic array
we can Resize it based on our need so let us
use a vector to implement the heap data structure
Now let us get into the insert operation
We can also call this and an enqueue operation basically what
is an insertion operation will Do is First
It will insert element in the heap and then call
built
Heap process to maintain the heap order property so that
the high priority element will always present at the root
Let us see some examples first
Let its insert element two since it is the first
element
Just push it in the vector so two will be
added as the first node now let us insert Element
five
First just push Element five
At the end in heap it will become the left
child of two
After that we need to apply the heapify
process to maintain its heap ordering principle so that the
high priority element will always present at the root
If we heapify it element five will come
to the top as it has the maximum priority we
already discussed
Heapify property in the previous videos
If you don't understand this kindly watch those videos before
proceeding further
Now let us insert Element 10 First push Element 10
At the end it will become the write child of
five and applied a heapify
process since 10 is greater than five it will
come to the top here we can notice that the
element with the highest priority is present at the root
node
Let us insert one more element
Push element 15
At the end it will become the left child of
two
Now we need to apply the heapify
process 15 is greater than two so it
will become a left child of 10 and 15 is
greater than 10
So it will come to the top and the heap
will look like this
And that's it this is how the insert operation will
work
The logic of insert operation will be if the vector
is empty just pushed the element
If it is not empty
First pushed the element at the end and then call
build
Heap process to heapify
it now let us quickly implement the insert
function
Let's create a function named Insert that takes two arguments
The first one refers to the vector and the next
one is integer value that needs to be inserted
This function will not return anything
So write it type as void
first let us find the size of the
vector
We can use the size function to get it so
write int size equal to heap dot size If the
size is zero which is need to push the element in
the vector
So write
If Size is equal to 0 heap dot push back of val
here push back function issues to push elements into a
vector from the back
The new values inserted into the vector at the end
If the size is greater than zero first we need
to push back the element so write heap dot push
back of val in the else part
And then we need to heapify the vector
So after the insertion called build Heap function with New
Heap and its last index
So write build
Heap of heap coma
It's last index heap dot size minus one and we
always pass the last index of array or vector to the
build
Heap function heap dot size minus one will give the last
index value
That's why we have passed heap dot sise minus one as
the second argument
And that's it we have implemented the insert function
In the next video we will learn how to get
the highest priority element from the priority queue.